---
author: Qifan
title: Collections of Interesting Mathsmatical Problems
date: "2023-06-27"
description: "This blog is used to collect some hard but interesting math problem I have encountered when I am preparing quant interview."
math: true
tags: 
  - "mathematics"
  - "quant"
---

Unsolved: 
- Analysis - Calculus - 3, 13

# Brain Teaser
1. $\mathbb{Q}^+$ can not be listed ascendingly. (the mean of two rational number is still a rational number.)
2. Every function can be written as sum of an odd function and an even function. 
3. Find a one-to-one mapping between $\mathbb{Z}$ and $\mathbb{Z}^+$. ($2k$ and $2k+1$)
4. $0.99999\cdots< 1$? (The uniqueness of limits)
5. Which one is larger, $e^{\pi}$ or $\pi^e$?
6. $i^i$ (What is the value of $\ln(i)$? Use Euler formula.)
7. Gambler A has (n+1) fair coins and gambler B has n fair coins. $\mathbb{P}(\text{A has more heads than B if both flip all their coins})=?$ (sysmetricity!)
8. Given $N$ points drawn randomly on the circumference of a circle, what is the probability that they are all within a semicircle? (starting from an arbitrary point $i$, what is the probability that the other $N-1$ points lies on the corresponding clockwise semicircle?)
9. What is the 100th digit to the right of the decimal point in $(1+\sqrt{2})^{3000}$? (calculate the value of $(1+\sqrt{2})^{3000}$ + $(1-\sqrt{2})^{3000}$ using binomial expansion twice.)
10. One amoeba can have 4 equiprobable states: die, stay the same, split into two or split into three. Starting from one amoeba, what is the probability that we have no amoeba in the end? (view the population generated by two amoebas as two population with the same probability of dying out.) 
11. A and B are playing a game alternatively: in each round, they all have probability $p$ of losing. What is the probability that the one playing the game first first lose the game? (use conditional probability!)

# Analysis
## Calculus
1. $\lim (a^n + b^n)^{1/n}=\max(a,b)$ (can be generalize)
2. $\lim \sqrt{n}(\sqrt{n+1} - \sqrt{n-1})=1$ 
3. $a_0=a, a_1=b, a_n=1/2(a_{n-1}+a_{n-2})$, then $\lim a_n=1/3(a+2b)$ (can not use fixed point trick. Then how to solve?)
4. $\mathbb{R}$ is uncountable. (use Cantor theorem. If $[0,1]$ is countable and we have a sequence of bounded closed interval, what will happen?)
5. In $\mathbb{R}$, there does not exists an uncountable collection of mutually disjoint intervals. (Find a rational number within each intervals.)
6. $(a,b)$ can not be written as a countable union of disjoint closed interval. (use Bolzano theorem.)
7. $\lim \sin(\sin(\cdots \sin(x))) = 0$ (monotone sequence + continuity)
8. Let $f$ be a continuous and decreasing function on $\mathbb{R}$. Then $f\circ f$ has either infinite number of fixed points or odd number of fixed points. 
9. Is there any continuous function $f$ satisfying $f\circ f = e^{-x}$? (consider monotonity.)
10. Is there any continuous function $f$ satisfying $f\circ f = e^{x}$? (Yes!)
11. Prove that the Riemann function is nowhere differentiable. (consider the decimal representation of rational number.)
12. Bounded and convex function must be constant.
13. If $a_{n+1}=\arctan a_n, a_1\in\mathbb{R}, \lim na_n^2=?$